---
layout: post
title: Good Art
---
I suspect all have an appreciation for both types of quality and that many people's enjoyment of art is a complicated interplay between these types, but I also suspect that most people favour one type on balance. What also seems interesting is how the relative frequencies of these preferences have changed over time - but more on that later.

Another suspicion I have is to do with the way in which people who have a preference for one particular quality tend towards a certain type of art. Modern art jumps to mind. I'm pretty sure if you surveyed modern art museum-goers, explained the distinction between qualities proposed, and then asked them to report where they are on the scale, they would tend more towards the secondary quality end. Why might this be the case? Well, I'm not really sure, but it could be because lots of modern art is very abstract and therefore more subject to interpretation. I think interpretation probably has a lot to do with feelings. 

If you conducted a similar experiment with those at a renaissance art museum, I think the results may be different - skewed slightly more towards the primary end of the distribution. It may even be possible to surmise this by just inspecting the gallery itself. When you go into a renaissance museum, the primary qualities are at the forefront. If you've been to same ones I have, there's a good chance you'll find paragraphs and paragraphs with talk of history, politics, religion, patronage, and science. Example: X was a polymath and a protegé to Y and he was commissioned by monarch Z to paint the scene of battle B which recently happened and he did this using instrument P etc... It seems to me that these lengthy paragraphs are somewhat more scarce in a modern art museum, after all, why there is a can of tomato soup placed precariously on the edge of a table is more up to you.

The question skipped over earlier is now even more pertinent. What is the reason that more observer-centric types of art like modern art are more popular now (or rather being made more frequently now)? Again, I can only speculate, but I think an analogous pattern has occured with music. It certainly appears that music overall has become less ambitious technically. Whilst I'm sure there are musicians today pushing the boundaries of the mathematical-like music of centuries past (e.g. Bach), most of popular music overwhelmingly runs in the opposite direction. Even seeing a modern virtuoso like Eddie Van Halen perform a legendary solo on stage is on longer that interesting to most young people.But, the advent of electronic music could play an important role. Modern music predates computerised music (reference needed!?) so I think this could only be a partial answer, but an important one nonetheless. Computers really opened the floodgates when it comes to what kinds of sounds can even be created - what you could refer to as the soundscape. It's plausible that opening up the soundscape created more of a fascination not with complexities of sounds but rather with the sounds themselves. Most modern songs I hear have inexplicable electronic sounds in them, and most of those sounds are attributable not to any specific instrument but to a producer's laptop. The new soundscape, in its seemingly infinite capacity to generate different sounds (and therefore feelings) is similar to the capacity of modern art to be limitlessly abstract and interpretable. Overall, we shouldn't deny the introspective qualities of Bach or the skill of Bob Marley, but the trend is noticeable. 

I'm sure other forms of art are optimising for secondary qualities over time too. I would love to hear what people interested in other artistic areas like fiction, cinema, or architecture have to say.
