---
layout: post
title: On Self Consciousness
---

Sometimes I find myself in situations, typically of the social sort, where I have a sharp and sudden feeling of self-awareness and or embarrassment about myself. Of course, it would be impossible for me to think about all aspects of myself at once - these thoughts commonly cluster around specific qualities like how smart you are, how athletic you are etc... These types of thoughts can be very consuming and compelling in the moment and can definitely reduce the quality of interactions with other people. This could be because you choose to say something which isn't quite as original (for the increased risk of having to defend yourself or respond to pushback), you choose not to say something at all, or, perhaps more importantly, you choose to avoid the whole interaction in the first place. Worrying is also a huge use of your attention. Time spent thinking excessively about yourself is time not listening to/thinking about what the other person is saying.

Sometimes, the worrying also compounds unstoppably - you become self-conscious about just how self-conscious you are - because it's pathetic and anxiety-inducing simply being **that** type of person. Here, the risk is that you climb up so many hopeless meta levels that you quickly die of hypoxia. In this case, it's probably useful to notice how many things about yourself you are not self conscious about (the vast majority of all things). Similar to what I wrote at the beginning, these thoughts tend to fall in align around common clusters - you aren't actually bad at **everything**. Most people are average in most ways. This is simply a statistical truth.

But a deeper solution, I think, is attention - specifically, allocating your attention towards the right (helpful) places. Of course, a certain level of self-awareness is entirely necessary for healthy social interaction (it's often instrumental in stopping us from doing/saying something which we obviously shouldn't), but I fail to see the utility in simple factual errors that often characterise this form of excessive self-awareness. The kind of factual errors I'm referring to regularly involve spotting false patterns in other people - patterns which you inevitably don't fit. If you're a very self-critical person, I think there's a high chance your thoughts are rarely that you are merely bad in some capacity, but more often that you are uniquely bad in it - in other words, bad in a way that is uncommon amongst other bad people. This is very bad as it leads you to think your situation is hopeless and that you are unhelpable because you have some new and only-just-discovered problem. Fortunately, this is exceptionally unlikely to be the case and can be a signpost for your own irrational thinking. What is probably happening instead is that you are spotting a pattern in others that doesn't really exist. What I mean here ties in to the end of the first paragraph - by failing to observe others and instead choosing to observe yourself, you will fail to notice just how different everybody is from others and instead notice just how different you are from others. So, as I said, I think the solution is just changing your attention in those moments when you are self-conscious. For example, if you stop thinking so much about the way you speak, how you eat, or the way you look and instead notice the variation in these dimensions that other people exhibit, you may find that the pattern you previously thought existed simply disappears. The idea that everyone on earth speaks, eats, and looks identically starts to seem absurd, and it should do. Obviously, this noticing exercise (which can involve seeing more of people's faults) should not be done in judgemental way. It would be very difficult to be that vehemently misanthropic anyway.

So: try to observe what others are doing and if you are failing to notice anything unique or idiosyncratic about an individual, you probably aren't noticing hard enough.
