---
layout: post
title: The Importance of Studying Sex Differences
---

The study of sex differences often raises legitimate concern. Previous attempts at understanding the biological nature of humans and human behavior have often proven to be perilous, and sometimes deadly. Many scientific fields of the past have fallen victim to pseudoscience and conspiracy theorizing, likely due to the complex social motivations which have underpinned them.  - two notable examples of the distorting effect of these influences being the Soviet Union’s [Lysenkoism](https://www.jstor.org/stable/41653570), Nazi Germany’s [Aryanism](https://faseb.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1096/fj.08-0202ufm), and Social Darwinism. A common thread running through these examples is that they misinterpret biological explanations, conflating human nature with how affairs should be arranged (often called the naturalistic fallacy), justifying [horrific acts](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/euthanasia-program) in the process.

Given these risks, we must ask ourselves why we want to study sex differences at all, given their potential to be misunderstood by scientists and the public alike. What good could possibly come of it? I argue there are also substantial costs to not studying sex differences. Clinically, we suffer from a lack of research on differences in health fields. Academically, we also suffer, with whole fields like evolutionary psychology accused of misinterpreting the study of sex differences. But fixing these disciplines alone will not alleviate the social inflammation which may occur even if good science is done on the issue. The only way to avoid such damage is if, in addition, science communicators and those responsible for informing the public of scientific issues accurately convey the research being done to the public.

	For starters, ignoring potential sex differences does harm, particularly in health and in the medical establishment. Medical research has a significant [gender gap](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.2217/17455057.4.3.237), with men being test subjects far more often than women. While this has started to change, there is still much [progress](https://elifesciences.org/articles/56344) to be made. The excuse for women’s poor representation is often that women have greater variability across many conditions due to their reproductive system, which we now know to be [false](https://journals.lww.com/pain/Fulltext/2005/09000/The_case_for_the_inclusion_of_female_subjects_in.1.aspx). Males too carry their own sources of variation in the form of dominance hierarchies which [alter](https://journals.lww.com/pain/Fulltext/2005/09000/The_case_for_the_inclusion_of_female_subjects_in.1.aspx), for example, men’s pain responses with respect to women’s. But even if we accepted that women had added complexity, shouldn’t this be a complexity which is accounted for? This gender gap, of course, has consequences for treatment of disease. For example, without any analysis of sex differences, we might assume that in the 55-64 age range, males and females carry an equal risk of developing coronary heart disease (CHD). In reality males have more than [twice the chance](https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article/39/4/424/4967741) of CHD than females in that age range. Better known are differences in lifespan as females [age more slowly](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21902801/) due to the slower rate of degradation of their telomere caps. 

Closing the gender gap is critical to treating sex-specific diseases or diseases that have sex-specific symptoms. Studies document well the pharmacokinetic (the processing of the drug by the body) and pharmacodynamic (the mechanism of the action of the drug) [differences](https://www.aafp.org/afp/2009/1201/p1254.html) in the way that drugs affect men and women. Body weight, gastrointestinal motility, and intestinal enzymatic activity are all examples of biological variables that differ between men and women and which have significant effects on the action of drugs on the body. In order to have a better understanding of these sex-specific diseases and treatments, we need to study differences between the sexes more closely. As [one study](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3388783/) put it: “Gender medicine must consider the needs of both sexes.”

In addition to the practical consequences of clinical research, behavior and psychological research also suffers from problematic studies of sex differences. Here, the problem lies in misinterpretation rather than a lack of study of sex differences - phenomena are regularly assumed, all too simplistically, to be beholden to the evolutionary-type explanations of the molecular world. One reason for this is that studying higher level phenomena like personality, emotion, mating, and group dynamics is more complex and multi-variate than the molecular mechanisms of drugs discussed earlier, and higher level phenomena is what much academic research on sex differences focuses on. This is because  Determining the causes of these and why sex difference occur in them requires looking at many potential factors.

In [one study](https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2002-06497-004) looking at the toy preferences of non-human primates, researchers found that the male vervets preferred to play with “construction and transportation” toys, rather than “doll and pot” toys. The explanation for this, they claim, is the presence of male hormones, which alter “the structure and function of the brain systems that subserve the recognition of these object categories’”. But this clearly does not take into account the socialization that has already occurred in both sexes. The vervets, with some up to 185 months old, will have already been significantly influenced by their elders in the male and female-typical behavior, undercutting the hypothesis that these differences are biologically determined. 
 
Criticism can also be extended to entire fields of research which claim to explain sex differences, rather than individual articles that have methodological flaws. Evolutionary psychology is a flagship example of this - the very foundations of the discipline are [questionable](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1461666031000063665?journalCode=rpeg19). Evolution may be a powerful explanatory framework, but it too can be [overexerted](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/out-the-darkness/201412/how-valid-is-evolutionary-psychology). Evolutionary psychology proposes that many, if not all, of our behaviors are products of natural selection i.e. are adaptations to the selection pressures of our ancestral environment, or are byproducts of these adaptations. The primary problem with this approach, even supposing we can apply evolutionary arguments here, is that it is extremely difficult to know much about any of our ancestral environments. As a result, the stories that evolutionary psychology proposes are speculative and all too convenient. [One such story](https://www.cep.ucsb.edu/grads/Sell/(2011)%20The%20recalibrational%20theory%20and%20violent%20anger.pdf) proposed by a paper in the “Aggression and Violent Behavior” journal outlines a “recalibrational theory of anger”, which claims anger is a social strategy used to bargain for better treatment by others or recalibrate the weighting of preferences of other individuals. While intuitive, hypotheses such as these are essentially unfalsifiable that rely on plausibility rather than testability, which is not sufficient for good science. The famous paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould famously referred to these post hoc narratives as just-so stories in reference to Rudyard Kipling’s book “Just So Stories” which made up fantastical explanations for how animals developed their characteristics.

Avoiding the pitfalls of these disciplines may not be enough for the benefits of studying  sex differences to accrue however. What is needed in addition to this are science educators who accurately convey research to the general public. Currently, misinformation about these topics [pervade common platforms](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2015.0119) on the internet and perpetuate false claims. This demonstrates a clash of incentives. Many media outlets, I’m sure, do care somewhat about educating the public correctly. But realistically, the misuse and misinterpretation of research will dominate real reporting if scaremongering, sensationalized articles have a higher clickthrough rate than articles that try to convey our current scientific understanding in the plainest, most objective terms. The antidote to clickbait news sites is a change in the priorities of science communicators, who need to value good reporting of research, possibly at the expense of readership. To help this process, it would also help if those who have expertise in the field write books, record podcasts, and film lectures to educate the public further about their own research. The people that can give the most rigorous, intricate, and complete explanations of research are the ones who conducted it.

[For comments](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13-pglhpYoRCOZCt9eWTQKvJGOk8r9lTVdS2TnOpBqcM/edit?usp=sharing)


